Expose grammar of graphics symbology to the Python API (#1420)
geojupyter/jupytergis: docs/user_guide/python_api/symbology.md

(symbology)=

> # Symbology

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Symbology examples
```

Since this contains examples and not the actual API reference, I think we should be a bit more explicit.

Right now `api.md` contains all the actual API reference, except for the docs for `explore` -- that has a dedicated page that combines examples and reference. It would be good to make these all consistent! I don't think we need to do that in this PR, we can just change the page title and move on.

## Symbology on `add_geojson_layer`

```python
from jupytergis import GISDocument, constant

doc = GISDocument()
doc.add_raster_layer(url="https://tile.openstreetmap.org/{z}/{x}/{y}.png")

doc.add_geojson_layer(
    path="data/france_regions.geojson",

>     symbology=[constant("green").encoding("fill"), constant("white").encoding("stroke")],

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    symbology=[
        constant("green").encoding("fill"),
        constant("white").encoding("stroke"),
    ],
```

)
```

```python
from jupytergis import GISDocument, field, InterpolationType

doc = GISDocument()
doc.add_geojson_layer(
    path="data/eq.geojson",
    symbology=[
        field("mag").identity().encoding("radius"),
        field("felt")

>         .interpolate(type=InterpolationType.logarithmic, from_=(1, 9000), to=(1, 10))

Reviewer: I like using an enum here! I think we should follow the convention of members in ALL_CAPS.

From the [Python Enum HOWTO](https://docs.python.org/3/howto/enum.html):

>Because Enums are used to represent constants, and to help avoid issues with name clashes between mixin-class methods/attributes and enum names, we strongly recommend using UPPER_CASE names for members, and will be using that style in our examples.

And that's reinforced by PEP8 guidance to use UPPER_CASE for constants.

        .color_ramp("viridis", n_shades=10)
        .encoding("fill"),
    ],
)
```

```python
from jupytergis import GISDocument, constant, field, when

doc = GISDocument()
doc.add_geojson_layer(
    path="data/eq.geojson",
    symbology=[
        field("mag").identity().encoding("radius"),

>         when(field("mag") >= 8).constant("red").encoding("fill"),

Reviewer: I like when-first. This reads really well.

>         when([field("mag") < 8, field("mag") > 3)

Reviewer: Unmatched opening `[` here -- should this be removed or do we need a closing bracket after the 2nd condition? Looks like we need the closing `]` from my reading of `symbology.py`, but we could consider `def when(self, *when: WhenInput)` to eliminate the need for passing a list. No strong feelings.

Author: > but we could consider def when(self, *when: WhenInput)

Agreed!

        .when_op("all")
        .constant("orange")
        .encoding("fill"),
        when(field("mag") <= 3).constant("green").encoding("fill"),
    ],
)
```

## Symbology on `add_geotiff_layer`

```python
from jupytergis import GISDocument, InterpolationType, field

doc = GISDocument()
doc.add_geotiff_layer(
    url="https://s2downloads.eox.at/demo/EOxCloudless/2020/rgbnir/s2cloudless2020-16bits_sinlge-file_z0-4.tif",
    min=2000,
    max=25000,
    symbology=[
        field("$band-1")
        .interpolate(
            type=InterpolationType.linear,
            from_=(0, 0.5),
            to=(0, 1),
        )
        .encoding("pixel-alpha"),
        field("$band-1")
        .interpolate(
            type=InterpolationType.linear,
            from_=(0, 0.5),
            to=(1, 9),
        )

>         .color_ramp("winter")

Reviewer: I think the term "color ramp" implies a linear and continuous gradient. And we also offer discrete color maps, cyclic colormaps, and divergent color maps. I think "colormap" is a more universal term, and if we're creating a new API, now's the time to nail down the terminology.

Suggest renaming `color_ramp` to `colormap` for this PR, and in our glossary (#1491) we can define that as our preferred term. Then we can do separate PRs to change our language throughout the codebase, docs, and UI.

        .encoding("pixel-rgb"),
    ],
)
```

```python
from jupytergis import GISDocument, field

doc = GISDocument()
doc.add_geotiff_layer(
    url="https://eoresults.esa.int/d/FCM-AGB-100m/2023/01/01/FCM-AGB-100m-2023/FCM_Europe_demo_2023_AGB.tif",
    min=0,
    max=240,
    symbology=[
        field("$band-1").identity().encoding("pixel-red"),
        field("$band-1").identity().encoding("pixel-green"),
        field("$band-1").identity().encoding("pixel-blue"),

>         field("$band-1").identity().encoding("pixel-alpha"),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        field("$band-1").identity().encoding(["pixel-red", "pixel-green", "pixel-blue", "pixel-alpha"]),
```

This is more consistent with the Notebook example. Or we could remove the list notation and use `*args`.

Author: > Or we could remove the list notation and use *args.

💯

    ],
)
```

```python
from jupytergis import GISDocument, constant, field

doc = GISDocument()
doc.add_geotiff_layer(
    url="https://eoresults.esa.int/d/FCM-AGB-100m/2023/01/01/FCM-AGB-100m-2023/FCM_Europe_demo_2023_AGB.tif",
    min=0,
    max=240,
    symbology=[
        constant(0).encoding("pixel-red"),

>         field("$band-1").scalar(domain=[0, 1], output_range=[0, 255]).encoding("pixel-green"),

Reviewer: Should this be `.interpolate`?

Author: Yeah I'll see what I can do. I have mixed feelings about the existence of `.interpolate`. It makes it difficult to understand the equivalence with what we provide in the front-end.

        constant(0).encoding("pixel-blue"),
        field("$band-1").identity().encoding("pixel-alpha"),
    ],
)
```

## Symbology on `add_vectortile_layer`

```python
from jupytergis import GISDocument, field

doc = GISDocument()
doc.add_vectortile_layer(
    url="https://example.com/tiles/{z}/{x}/{y}.pbf",

>     symbology=[field("kind").categorical().color_ramp("viridis").encoding("stroke")],

Reviewer: What does `.categorical()` do here? Is this simply providing information to the next element in the chain to influence the `color_ramp(...)` behavior? In that case, maybe it should be an argument to `color_ramp(...)`?

Author: It creates the categorical scale, and the categorical scale then needs a colormap defined

)
```

> ## Additional symbology recipes

Reviewer: 💯 This is very thorough. So important for a complicated domain like this :)

Constant numeric channel mapping:

```python
from jupytergis import constant

symbology = [constant(3).encoding("radius")]
```

Categorical mapping:

```python
from jupytergis import field

symbology = [field("landuse").categorical().color_ramp("viridis").encoding("fill")]
```

Scalar mapping:

```python
from jupytergis import field

> symbology = [field("population").scalar(domain=[0, 1_000_000], output_range=[2, 15]).encoding("radius")]

Reviewer: Should this be `.interpolate`?

Author: `.scalar` is a scale just like `.categorical`. I'd like to keep the equivalence with the front-end while making it user friendly. 

If we want to rethink the scalar scale name, it's a more general issue than only this PR.

```

Heatmap and clustering preprocessors:

```python
from jupytergis import cluster, constant, field, heatmap

> heat = heatmap(radius=20, blur=30, mappings=[field("mag").color_ramp("hot").encoding("fill")])

Reviewer: I thought I saw earlier in the review (though I'm struggling to find it now) a different notation like `heatmap().field("mag").[...]`

EDIT: Found it, it's in the screenshot. I assume the screenshot is out of date :)

I think the notation where we chain from a heatmap call is confusing because it mixes the concepts of a Symbology Layer and a Symbology Mapping together, and doesn't support multiple mappings for a heatmap layer. I.e. I like the example you have here.

Author: Indeed the screencast from the PR comment is outdated, it was one of the first versions. The new notation is the one here 👍🏽

clusters = cluster(radius=40, mappings=[constant("black").encoding("stroke")])
```

Combine multiple symbology fragments into multiple grammar layers:

```python
from jupytergis import constant

symbology = [
    [constant("#00FF00").encoding("fill")],
    [constant(2).encoding("stroke-width")],
]
```

> Use a list of symbology objects (equivalent to multiple layers):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use a list of symbology objects (equivalent to multiple symbology layers):
```

Reviewer: We'll need to come back to this once we've resolved #1479

```python
from jupytergis import constant

symbology_list = [
    [constant("#00FF00").encoding("fill")],
    [constant(3).encoding("radius")],
]
```

(stylechannel-values)=

> ## Allowed `target` values

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Allowed `encoding` values
```

> Public symbology functions accept `target` as either a single `TargetChannel`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The {meth}`symbology.FieldPredicate.encoding` method accepts either a single `TargetChannel`
```

value or a list of `TargetChannel` values.

String literals shown below are the corresponding enum values.

> Supported direct channels:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Supported direct visual encodings, corresponding to [OpenLayers flat style](https://openlayers.org/en/latest/apidoc/module-ol_style_flat.html):
```

(symbology)=

# Symbology examples

## Symbology on `add_geojson_layer`

```python
from jupytergis import GISDocument, constant

doc = GISDocument()
doc.add_raster_layer(url="https://tile.openstreetmap.org/{z}/{x}/{y}.png")

doc.add_geojson_layer(
    path="data/france_regions.geojson",
    symbology=[
        constant("green").encoding("fill"),
        constant("white").encoding("stroke"),
    ],

> )

Reviewer: Thinking out loud: It would be lovely if we could automate testing of these examples.

Author: Indeed. I'd also like to get automated screenshots of the visual result.

```

```python
from jupytergis import GISDocument, field, ClassificationMode

doc = GISDocument()
doc.add_geojson_layer(
    path="data/eq.geojson",
    symbology=[
        field("mag").encoding("radius"),

>         field("felt").color_ramp(

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        field("felt").colormap(
```

        ).encoding("fill"),
    ],
)

doc
```

```python
from jupytergis import GISDocument, constant, field, when

doc = GISDocument()
doc.add_geojson_layer(
    path="data/eq.geojson",
    symbology=[
        field("mag").encoding("radius"),
        when(field("mag") >= 8).constant("red").encoding("fill"),
        when(field("mag") < 8, field("mag") > 3)
            .constant("orange")
            .encoding("fill"),
        when(field("mag") <= 3).constant("green").encoding("fill"),
    ],
)

doc
```

```python
from jupytergis import GISDocument, field

doc = GISDocument()
doc.add_geojson_layer(
    path="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/nvkelso/natural-earth-vector/master/geojson/ne_10m_roads.geojson",
    symbology=[field("type").categorical(colormap="schemeDark2").encoding("stroke")],
)

doc
```

## Symbology on `add_geotiff_layer`

```python
from jupytergis import GISDocument, field

doc = GISDocument()
doc.add_geotiff_layer(
    url="https://s2downloads.eox.at/demo/EOxCloudless/2020/rgbnir/s2cloudless2020-16bits_sinlge-file_z0-4.tif",
    min=2000,
    max=25000,
    symbology=[
        field("$band-1").scalar(domain=(0, 0.5), output_range=(0, 1)).encoding("pixel-alpha"),

>         field("$band-1").color_ramp("winter", n_shades=9).encoding("pixel-rgb"),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        field("$band-1").colormap("winter", n_shades=9).encoding("pixel-rgb"),
```

        field("$band-1").identity().encoding("pixel-red", "pixel-green", "pixel-blue", "pixel-alpha"),
    ],
)
```

```python
from jupytergis import GISDocument, constant, field

doc = GISDocument()
doc.add_geotiff_layer(
    url="https://eoresults.esa.int/d/FCM-AGB-100m/2023/01/01/FCM-AGB-100m-2023/FCM_Europe_demo_2023_AGB.tif",
    min=0,
    max=240,
    symbology=[
        constant(0).encoding("pixel-red"),
        field("$band-1").scalar(domain=[0, 1], output_range=[0, 255]).encoding("pixel-green"),
        constant(0).encoding("pixel-blue"),
        field("$band-1").identity().encoding("pixel-alpha"),
    ],
)
```

## Symbology on `add_vectortile_layer`

```python
from jupytergis import GISDocument, field

doc = GISDocument()
doc.add_geojson_layer(
    path="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/nvkelso/natural-earth-vector/master/geojson/ne_10m_roads.geojson",
    symbology=[field("type").categorical(colormap="schemeDark2").encoding("stroke")],
)

doc
```

## Additional symbology recipes

Constant numeric channel mapping:

```python
from jupytergis import constant

symbology = [constant(3).encoding("radius")]
```

Categorical mapping:

```python
from jupytergis import field

> symbology = [field("landuse").categorical(colormap="viridis").encoding("fill")]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
symbology = [field("landuse").categorical(colormap="schemeSet1").encoding("fill")]
```

Categorical colormap :)

```

Scalar mapping:

```python
from jupytergis import field

> symbology = [field("population").scalar(domain=[0, 1_000_000], output_range=[2, 15]).encoding("radius")]

Reviewer: > `1_000_000`

Love seeing this fairly unknown Python feature being used  :)

```

> Heatmap and clustering preprocessors:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Heatmap and clustering preprocessors as separate symbology layers:
```

```python
from jupytergis import cluster, constant, field, heatmap

> heat = heatmap(radius=20, blur=30, mappings=[field("mag").colormap("hot").encoding("fill")])

Reviewer: ```suggestion
heat = heatmap(radius=20, blur=30, mappings=[field("$density").colormap("hot").encoding("pixel-rgb")])
```
I think this is right

> heat = heatmap(radius=20, blur=30, mappings=[field("mag").color_ramp("hot").encoding("fill")])

Reviewer: ```suggestion
heat = heatmap(radius=20, blur=30, mappings=[field("mag").colormap("hot").encoding("fill")])
```

> clusters = cluster(radius=40, mappings=[constant("black").encoding("stroke")])

Reviewer: ```suggestion
clusters = cluster(radius=40, mappings=[constant("black").encoding("stroke")])

symbology = [heat, clusters]
```

```

Combine multiple symbology fragments into multiple grammar layers:

```python
from jupytergis import constant

symbology = [
    [constant("#00FF00").encoding("fill")],
    [constant(2).encoding("stroke-width")],
]
```

Use a list of symbology objects (equivalent to multiple symbology layers):

```python
from jupytergis import constant

symbology_list = [
    [constant("#00FF00").encoding("fill")],
    [constant(3).encoding("radius")],
]

> ```

Reviewer: I'd suggest just deleting these -- they are the same as each other, and they aren't very meaningful examples of multiple symbology layers. The example above with preprocessors can show a more meaningful example of layers IMO!
```suggestion
```
